README.md, before:

# Molecular Cell Classification
*Acknowledgments: This project is inspired by the work done in the article, [Learning Drug Functions from Chemical Structures with Convolutional Neural Networks and Random Forests](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00236) by Jesse G Meyer, Shengchao Liu, Ian J Miller, Joshua J Coon, Anthony Gitter Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling. 2019, 59(10) 4438-4449. Their github and data sources can be found [here.](https://github.com/jgmeyerucsd/drug-class)*

## Executive Summary
Using two types of molecular structure representation of chemicals: 2D molecular structure (image data) and SMILES (text strings), I compare the performance of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) on classifying the chemicals by their MeSH therapeutic drug class.

---

## Problem Statement
Neglected diseases is a term used to describe diseases that affect a niche population with little to no treatments available. The current drug research & development (R&D) system is long and costly, which does not incentivize finding new drug treatments for neglected diseases.

There are examples of drug treatments that were originally developed to treat cancer which were later "shelved," or not used, when proven to be ineffective for treating cancer. Some years later, researchers will come across this drug treatment and discover that it's actually effective in treating another disease, like a neglected disease.

With the onset of image processing techniques, I wanted to explore the possibility of predicting promising new drug treatments based on their molecular structures.


---

## What's my MVP here?

Given the data provided by Meyer, et. al, I want to explore classifying molecules based on:

1. Chemical molecular structure (provided as images). Ex:
![Chem structure](./test_data/cns/753.png)
2. SMILES (provided as text strings). Ex:
## Brc1c(NC2=NCCN2)ccc2nccnc12

I want to compare which model is more accurate at predicting the drug therapy class. If molecular structures perform better, then that implies there is information about the geometric structure of chemicals that is more representative of its properties.

---
## Data

For now, I have copied a subset of the data provided by Meyer, et. al to perform a binary (antineoplastic, or cns) classification model [here](./data/CID_properties_nr.csv).

Here are the available chemicals from the original dataset:


|Drug Class|Number of Chemicals|
|:---|:---|
|antineoplastic|1174|
|cns|1141|
|cardio|787|
|antiinflammatory|372|
|hematologic|268|
|gastrointestinal|255|
|lipidregulating|164|
|reproductivecontrol|148|
|antiinfective|140|
|dermatologic|108|
|respiratorysystem|100|
|urological|22|

In order to have relatively balanced classes, I am focusing the classification model on the three biggest classes: Antineoplastic, CNS, and Cardio.

<img src="./plots/number_chemicals.png" alt="Number of chemicals" width="75%"/>


The images are split into my train set [here](./train_data) and test set [here](./test_data).

---

## EDA

Exploring some of the physical differences among the classes.

#### Molecular Weights
<img src="./plots/molecular_weights.png" alt="Molecular weights" width="75%"/>

From this distribution, we can see that the molecular weights are distinct for each class. CNS molecules, in general, have a higher molecular weight than the other classes.

#### Hydrogen Bonds
Hydrogen bonds are a special type of attraction where one hydrogen atom bonds to a very electronegative atom in vicinity of another electronegative atom with a lone pair of electrons [(source).](https://chem.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Physical_and_Theoretical_Chemistry_Textbook_Maps/Supplemental_Modules_\(Physical_and_Theoretical_Chemistry\)/Physical_Properties_of_Matter/Atomic_and_Molecular_Properties/Intermolecular_Forces/Specific_Interactions/Hydrogen_Bonding)

__Hydrogen bond acceptors__ are typically electronegative atoms that have a lone pair of electrons.

<img src="./plots/hbond_acceptors.png" alt="Hydrogen bond acceptors" width="75%"/>


__Hydrogen bond donors__ are hydrogens that are attached to one of those electronegative elements(like Oxygen or Nitrogen). The positive charge that this hydrogen acquires allows it to bond to the nearby electronegative atom.

<img src="./plots/hbond_donors.png" alt="Hydrogen bond donors" width="75%"/>


From these boxplot charts, we see the Antineoplastic drugs have generally more H bond acceptors and H bond donors per molecule. The distribution ranges for each class.

---

## Modeling
|Model|Data Type|Accuracy Score|
|:---|:---|:---|
|SVC|Chemical properties (numeric)|0.53|
|CNN|2D Chemical structures (images)|0.61|
|RNN|1D Chemical structures (strings)|0.64|

__[SVC Model](./code/003_SVC.ipynb)__:
To get a baseline score of how my CNN and RNN models perform, I first built a multi-class SVC model using chemical properties as my features. Chemical properties included: Hydrogen bond acceptor count, hydrogen bond donor count, molecular weight, and xlogp.

The validation accuracy score for my SVC model was 0.53.

__[CNN Model](./code/003_cnn_multiclass.ipynb)__:
Using image data of my chemical structures, I ran multiple CNN models. Two were custom CNN models, and one used a pretrained model VGG16.

My best performing CNN model utilized VGG16, with a  validation accuracy score of 0.61. This leads me to believe that having a bigger training data set helps with the performance of the model.

![CNN_accuracy](./plots/accuracy_loss_cnn_vgg16.png)

Using the VGG16 model helped adjust for the overfit compared to my custom built CNN models.

__[RNN Model](./code/003_rnn.ipynb)__:
Using SMILES data of my chemical structures, I ran a RNN model. First, I

My best performing CNN model utilized VGG16, with a  validation accuracy score of 0.61.

![RNN_accuracy](./plots/accuracy_loss_rnn.png)

Commit message:

updated README to include evaluation section. Saved models for future use.

README.md, after:

# Molecular Cell Classification
*Acknowledgments: This project is inspired by the work done in the article, [Learning Drug Functions from Chemical Structures with Convolutional Neural Networks and Random Forests](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00236) by Jesse G Meyer, Shengchao Liu, Ian J Miller, Joshua J Coon, Anthony Gitter Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling. 2019, 59(10) 4438-4449. Their github and data sources can be found [here.](https://github.com/jgmeyerucsd/drug-class)*

## Executive Summary
Using two types of molecular structure representation of chemicals: 2D molecular structure (image data) and SMILES (text strings), I compare the performance of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) on classifying the chemicals by their MeSH therapeutic drug class.

---

## Problem Statement
Neglected diseases is a term used to describe diseases that affect a niche population with little to no treatments available. The current drug research & development (R&D) system is long and costly, which does not incentivize finding new drug treatments for neglected diseases.

There are examples of drug treatments that were originally developed to treat cancer which were later "shelved," or not used, when proven to be ineffective for treating cancer. Some years later, researchers will come across this drug treatment and discover that it's actually effective in treating another disease, like a neglected disease.

With the onset of image processing techniques, I wanted to explore the possibility of predicting promising new drug treatments based on their molecular structures.


---

## What's my MVP here?

Given the data provided by Meyer, et. al, I want to explore classifying molecules based on:

1. Chemical molecular structure (provided as images). Ex:
![Chem structure](./test_data/cns/753.png)
2. SMILES (provided as text strings). Ex:
## Brc1c(NC2=NCCN2)ccc2nccnc12

I want to compare which model is more accurate at predicting the drug therapy class. If molecular structures perform better, then that implies there is information about the geometric structure of chemicals that is more representative of its properties.

---
## Data

For now, I have copied a subset of the data provided by Meyer, et. al to perform a binary (antineoplastic, or cns) classification model [here](./data/CID_properties_nr.csv).

Here are the available chemicals from the original dataset:


|Drug Class|Number of Chemicals|
|:---|:---|
|antineoplastic|1174|
|cns|1141|
|cardio|787|
|antiinflammatory|372|
|hematologic|268|
|gastrointestinal|255|
|lipidregulating|164|
|reproductivecontrol|148|
|antiinfective|140|
|dermatologic|108|
|respiratorysystem|100|
|urological|22|

In order to have relatively balanced classes, I am focusing the classification model on the three biggest classes: Antineoplastic, CNS, and Cardio.

<img src="./plots/number_chemicals.png" alt="Number of chemicals" width="75%"/>


The images are split into my train set [here](./train_data) and test set [here](./test_data).

---

## EDA

Exploring some of the physical differences among the classes.

#### Molecular Weights
<img src="./plots/molecular_weights.png" alt="Molecular weights" width="75%"/>

From this distribution, we can see that the molecular weights are distinct for each class. CNS molecules, in general, have a higher molecular weight than the other classes.

#### Hydrogen Bonds
Hydrogen bonds are a special type of attraction where one hydrogen atom bonds to a very electronegative atom in vicinity of another electronegative atom with a lone pair of electrons [(source).](https://chem.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Physical_and_Theoretical_Chemistry_Textbook_Maps/Supplemental_Modules_\(Physical_and_Theoretical_Chemistry\)/Physical_Properties_of_Matter/Atomic_and_Molecular_Properties/Intermolecular_Forces/Specific_Interactions/Hydrogen_Bonding)

__Hydrogen bond acceptors__ are typically electronegative atoms that have a lone pair of electrons.

<img src="./plots/hbond_acceptors.png" alt="Hydrogen bond acceptors" width="75%"/>


__Hydrogen bond donors__ are hydrogens that are attached to one of those electronegative elements(like Oxygen or Nitrogen). The positive charge that this hydrogen acquires allows it to bond to the nearby electronegative atom.

<img src="./plots/hbond_donors.png" alt="Hydrogen bond donors" width="75%"/>


From these boxplot charts, we see the Antineoplastic drugs have generally more H bond acceptors and H bond donors per molecule. The distribution ranges for each class.

---

## Modeling
|Model|Data Type|Accuracy Score|
|:---|:---|:---|
|SVC|Chemical properties (numeric)|0.53|
|CNN|2D Chemical structures (images)|0.61|
|RNN|1D Chemical structures (strings)|0.66|

__[SVC Model](./code/003_SVC.ipynb)__:
To get a baseline score of how my CNN and RNN models perform, I first built a multi-class SVC model using chemical properties as my features. Chemical properties included: Hydrogen bond acceptor count, hydrogen bond donor count, molecular weight, and xlogp.

The validation accuracy score for my SVC model was 0.53.

__[CNN Model](./code/003_cnn_multiclass.ipynb)__:
Using image data of my chemical structures, I ran multiple CNN models. Two were custom CNN models, and one used a pretrained model VGG16.

My best performing CNN model utilized VGG16, with a  validation accuracy score of 0.61. This leads me to believe that having a bigger training data set helps with the performance of the model.

![CNN_accuracy](./plots/accuracy_loss_cnn_vgg16.png)

Using the VGG16 model helped adjust for the overfit compared to my custom built CNN models.

__[RNN Model](./code/003_rnn.ipynb)__:
Using SMILES data of my chemical structures, I ran a RNN model. I used the Keras built in Tokenizer by to preprocess my text by character count .

The validation accuracy score for my RNN model was 0.66.

![RNN_accuracy](./plots/accuracy_loss_rnn.png)

This model is overfit to my training data. I can adjust for overfitting by either getting more training data, or adding more hidden layers.


---

## Evaluation

Both my CNN and RNN models were better at predicting drug class compared to using physical properties alone.

Let's compare how the CNN and RNN models are predicting each class.
<p float="centered">
  <img src="./plots/confusion_matrix_cnn.png" width="45%" />
  <img src="./plots/confusion_matrix_rnn.png
" width="45%" />
</p>

Looking at how the two models generate predictions for drug types, the RNN model is better at classifying CNS drug types compared to the CNN model. This tells me that there might be more distinct features in SMILES data for CNS drug types compared to the other types.
